README.md, before:

# biological-graph-database

Graph Database Infrastructure for Biological Applications (particularly molecular biology applications)

This is basically where we are collecting all our Neo4j code for making general purpose biological graph databases. We've found this infrastructure useful on multiple occasions.

We started with NCBI's taxonomy and gene data.

## How to run this thing

You need a lot of memory...

```
mkdir output
mkdir output/gene_lists
mkdir data

cd data
mkdir taxonomy
cd taxonomy
wget ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz
gunzip taxdump.tar.gz 
tar -xf taxdump.tar 
gzip taxdump.tar 
cd ..
cd ..

cd data
mkdir gene
cd gene
wget ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/DATA/gene_info.gz
wget ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/DATA/gene2go.gz
wget ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/DATA/gene2pubmed.gz
gunzip gene_info.gz
gunzip gene2go.gz
gunzip gene2pubmed.gz
cd ..
cd ..

cd data
mkdir DisGeNET
cd DisGeNET
wget http://www.disgenet.org/ds/DisGeNET/files/current/disgenet_2017_v5-3-0.db.gz
gunzip disgenet_2017_v5-3-0.db.gz
cat ../../DisGeNET.sql | sqlite3 disgenet_2017_v5-3-0.db > relevant_db_dump.tsv
gzip disgenet_2017_v5-3-0.db
cd ..
cd ..


$NEO4J_HOME/bin/neo4j start

python3 load_taxonomy.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password --limit-taxonomies-to 9606,10090,10116

python3 preprocess_gene_info.py --limit-taxonomies-to 9606,10090,10116

python3 load_gene.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password

python3 load_and_link_synonyms.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password

python3 link_genes_to_taxonomy.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password

python3 load_gene_to_pubmed.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password --limit-taxonomies-to 9606,10090,10116

python3 load_gene_to_go.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password --limit-taxonomies-to 9606,10090,10116
```

## Running the code we created for a Harvard Medical School demonstration

```
cd project_for_Harvard_Medical_School__Kevin/

python3 code_for_Kevin.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password

python3 directly_link_genes_to_diseases.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password

cd ..
```

## Useful queries

### Boring queries

Find the taxonomy node for human:

```
MATCH (c:NCBI_TAXONOMY) WHERE c.id = 9606 RETURN c;
```
Find the taxonomy node for human, which specific attributes:
```
MATCH (c:NCBI_TAXONOMY) WHERE c.id = 9606 RETURN c.id AS NCBI_taxonomy_id, c.name AS scientific_name;
```

Find the NCBI gene synonym node 'A1B':
```
MATCH (n:NCBI_GENE_SYNONYM) WHERE n.symbol = "A1B" RETURN n;
```

### Slightly more interesting queries

Show taxonomy (should be 9606--human) and gene synonyms for human gene A1BG:
```
MATCH (g:NCBI_GENE)-[r1:HAS_NCBI_TAXONOMY]->(t:NCBI_TAXONOMY), (g)-[r2:HAS_NCBI_GENE_SYNONYM]->(gs:NCBI_GENE_SYNONYM), (gs)-[r3:HAS_NCBI_TAXONOMY]->(t) WHERE g.id = 1 RETURN g, r1, t, r2, gs, r3;
```

### Much more interesting queries

Show the genes and gene ontology terms connected with diseases.
```
MATCH (d:HMS_DISEASE)-[rg:INVOLVES_NCBI_GENE]->(g:NCBI_GENE)-[rgo:HAS_GENE_ONTOLOGY]->(go:GENE_ONTOLOGY) RETURN d, rg, g, rgo, go LIMIT 500;
```

Commit message:

Added another program to link genes amongst themselves.

README.md, after:

# biological-graph-database

Graph Database Infrastructure for Biological Applications (particularly molecular biology applications)

This is basically where we are collecting all our Neo4j code for making general purpose biological graph databases. We've found this infrastructure useful on multiple occasions.

We started with NCBI's taxonomy and gene data.

## How to run this thing

You need a lot of memory...

```
mkdir output
mkdir output/gene_lists
mkdir data

cd data
mkdir taxonomy
cd taxonomy
wget ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz
gunzip taxdump.tar.gz 
tar -xf taxdump.tar 
gzip taxdump.tar 
cd ..
cd ..

cd data
mkdir gene
cd gene
wget ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/DATA/gene_info.gz
wget ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/DATA/gene2go.gz
wget ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/DATA/gene2pubmed.gz
gunzip gene_info.gz
gunzip gene2go.gz
gunzip gene2pubmed.gz
cd ..
cd ..

cd data
mkdir DisGeNET
cd DisGeNET
wget http://www.disgenet.org/ds/DisGeNET/files/current/disgenet_2017_v5-3-0.db.gz
gunzip disgenet_2017_v5-3-0.db.gz
cat ../../DisGeNET.sql | sqlite3 disgenet_2017_v5-3-0.db > relevant_db_dump.tsv
gzip disgenet_2017_v5-3-0.db
cd ..
cd ..


$NEO4J_HOME/bin/neo4j start

python3 load_taxonomy.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password --limit-taxonomies-to 9606,10090,10116

python3 preprocess_gene_info.py --limit-taxonomies-to 9606,10090,10116

python3 load_gene.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password

python3 load_and_link_synonyms.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password

python3 link_genes_to_taxonomy.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password

python3 load_gene_to_pubmed.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password --limit-taxonomies-to 9606,10090,10116

python3 load_gene_to_go.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password --limit-taxonomies-to 9606,10090,10116
```

## Running the code we created for a Harvard Medical School demonstration

```
cd project_for_Harvard_Medical_School__Kevin/

python3 code_for_Kevin.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password

python3 directly_link_genes_to_diseases.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password

python3 directly_link_genes_to_each_other_weighted_by_diseases.py --hostname localhost --username neo4j --password a-not-too-serious-password

cd ..
```

## Useful queries

### Boring queries

Find the taxonomy node for human:

```
MATCH (c:NCBI_TAXONOMY) WHERE c.id = 9606 RETURN c;
```
Find the taxonomy node for human, which specific attributes:
```
MATCH (c:NCBI_TAXONOMY) WHERE c.id = 9606 RETURN c.id AS NCBI_taxonomy_id, c.name AS scientific_name;
```

Find the NCBI gene synonym node 'A1B':
```
MATCH (n:NCBI_GENE_SYNONYM) WHERE n.symbol = "A1B" RETURN n;
```

### Slightly more interesting queries

Show taxonomy (should be 9606--human) and gene synonyms for human gene A1BG:
```
MATCH (g:NCBI_GENE)-[r1:HAS_NCBI_TAXONOMY]->(t:NCBI_TAXONOMY), (g)-[r2:HAS_NCBI_GENE_SYNONYM]->(gs:NCBI_GENE_SYNONYM), (gs)-[r3:HAS_NCBI_TAXONOMY]->(t) WHERE g.id = 1 RETURN g, r1, t, r2, gs, r3;
```

### Much more interesting queries

Show the genes and gene ontology terms connected with diseases.
```
MATCH (d:HMS_DISEASE)-[rg:INVOLVES_NCBI_GENE]->(g:NCBI_GENE)-[rgo:HAS_GENE_ONTOLOGY]->(go:GENE_ONTOLOGY) RETURN d, rg, g, rgo, go LIMIT 500;
```
